# WIKI PAGES


Wiktionary: Glossary of terms
https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Appendix:Glossary

LINKS

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alphabet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrillic_alphabets
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyrillic_script
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Early_Cyrillic_alphabet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eastern_Orthodox_Slavs
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_hieroglyphs
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaj%27s_Latin_alphabet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glagolitic_script
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_alphabet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latin_script
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenician_alphabet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proto-Sinaitic_script
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serbian_Cyrillic_alphabet
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serbo-Croatian
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typographic_ligature
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncial_script
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vuk_Karad%C5%BEi%C4%87




- [Serbian cyrillic script - Google Search](https://www.google.com/search?q=Serbian+cyrillic+script&oq=Serbian+cyrillic+script&aqs=chrome..69i57.599j0j9&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8)


* Part of speech - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Part_of_speech

* Lexical item - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexical_item

* Lexicography - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexicography

* Noun - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noun

* Grammatical aspect - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammatical_aspect

* Grammatical tense - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammatical_tense

* Grammatical conjugation - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammatical_conjugation

* Help:IPA/English - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:IPA/English#See_also

* International Phonetic Alphabet - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet

* Phone (phonetics) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phone_(phonetics)

* Phoneme - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoneme

* Gentium - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gentium

* Charis SIL - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charis_SIL

* Everson Mono - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everson_Mono

* Help:IPA/Conventions for English - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:IPA/Conventions_for_English

* Pronunciation respelling for English - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pronunciation_respelling_for_English

* Grammatical mood - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammatical_mood

* Voice (grammar) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voice_(grammar)

* Lexicon - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexicon

* Lexeme - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexeme

* Inflection - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflection

* Lexical semantics - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexical_semantics

* Verb - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verb
