# DB: Pagination


## Introduction
Laravel's paginator is integrated with the query builder and Eloquent ORM and provides pagination of database results out of the box. The HTML generated by the paginator is compatible with the Bootstrap CSS framework.


## Basic Usage

There are several ways to paginate items.

### Paginating Query Builder Results
The simplest is by using the `paginate` method on the query builder or an Eloquent query. The paginate method automatically takes care of setting the proper limit and offset based on the current page being viewed by the user. By default, the current page is detected by the value of the `page` query string argument on the HTTP request. This value is automatically detected by Laravel, and is also automatically inserted into links generated by the paginator.

In this example, the only argument is the number of items per page:

```php
namespace App\Http\Controllers;

use App\Http\Controllers\Controller;
use Illuminate\Support\Facades\DB;

class UserController extends Controller
{
  public function index()
  {
    $users = DB::table('users')->paginate(15);
    return view('user.index', ['users' => $users]);
  }
}
```

> Currently, pagination operations that use a `groupBy` statement cannot be executed efficiently by Laravel. If you need it, create it manually.


### Next-Previous Pagination
If you only need "Next" and "Previous" use `simplePaginate` to perform efficient query. This is very useful for large datasets when you do not need to display a link for each page number when rendering your view:

```php
$users = DB::table('users')->simplePaginate(15);
```

### Paginating Eloquent Results
is the same as paginating query builder results:

```php
$users = App\User::paginate(15);

// call paginate after setting other constraints on the query'
$users = User::where('votes', '>', 100)->paginate(15);

// use simplePaginate for simple pagination:
$users = User::where('votes', '>', 100)->simplePaginate(15);
```


## Displaying Pagination Results

- Calling `paginate` method gets you an instance of `Illuminate\Pagination\LengthAwarePaginator`
- Calling `simplePaginate` method gets you an instance of `Illuminate\Pagination\Paginator`
- These 2 objects provide methods that describe the result set
- they are also iterators and may be looped as an array.

To display the results and render the page links using Blade:

```php
<div class="container">
    @foreach ($users as $user)
        {{ $user->name }}
    @endforeach
</div>

{{ $users->links() }}
```

The `links` renders the links to the rest of the pages in the result set. Each link already contains proper page query string.
