# MySQL Indexeshttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/mysql-indexes.htmlIndex types:- *KEY*       Provides faster db scanning, allowing duplicates- *UNIQUE*    unique-key constraints. Like KEY but disallows duplicates- *PRIMARY*   primary-key constraints. Like UNIQUE plus non-null, auto-inc uint- *FULLTEXT*- *SPATIAL*- *FOREIGN*   foreign-key constraints- db indexes (keys) are used to place additional constraints on tables- they contribute new functionality or define conditions- indexes speed up locating records dramatically- without it, dbe must scan the db record-by-record- indexes make some db operations possible and others significantly faster- very fast random lookups, lookups with creteria, queries with ordering- an index is usually created on one column, although more cols may be usedA db index (or a key) is a data structure stored separately from the files that make up a table with an index. As an impl, an index is a similar strucure to a db tabl, but it always has a key (usually PK) that points back to corresponding records in the original tbl.INSERTs and UPDATEs take longer on indexed tables, because DBE has to manage them additionally, but SELECT statements are dramatically fasterAll types of index will make db scanning faster; that is, the KEY only improves db searching while other indexes bring in additional features.Types of indexes:- PRIMARY- KEY- UNIQUE- FULLTEXT- SPATIAL- FOREIGN* **PRIMARY** index is the primary key, PK: uint, unique, autoinc, non-null. For example, in a user management table, usually the PK is an artificial key (as opposed to a natural attribute that's intrinsic to an entity) and used to identify each record uniquely; may be named `user_id` or just `id`.* **KEY** index, aka *simple index*, just provides one thing (that all indexes do): faster location of records. It allows duplicated values. For example, in a user management table, it may be placed on the "email" column to spped up email search.* **UNIQUE** index prevents duplicated values in the indexed column(s). For example, in a user management table, it may be used on the "username" column to forbid duplicated user names.```sqlCREATE   UNIQUE INDEX index_name   ON table_name   (column_name [, column_name, ... ] ) ;CREATE UNIQUE INDEX unique_first ON dobermanns (first);-- KEY index with DESC attributeCREATE UNIQUE INDEX author_index  ON tutorials_tbl   (tutorial_author DESC)```If you often fecth the data in a descending order, use keyword `DESC` after the column name, when defining an index.