# Philosophy :: TERMS

entity
concept
object
abstract object
state of affairs, situation
proposition
truth
truth-bearer
truth-maker
fallacy
substance
substratum, thing-in-itself
essence
property, attribute
accident
particulars, individuals
universals
type
kind
property
relation
type
relation
class
token
instantiation
instantiation principle
description
definite description
definition
determiner
existence
category of being
ontological property of being
desiderata
essence
accident
abstract
concrete
type-token distinction
phenomenon
noumenon
use-mention distinction
sense
reference
sense and reference
a priori
a posteriori
analytic-synthetic distinction
analytic proposition
synthetic proposition
map-territory relation
subject
object
subjectivity vs objectivity
observer vs observed
universals vs particulars
universals and properties


theory of truth
theory of descriptions
ontological theories
theory of categories
substance theory
substance-attribute theory


philosophy
epistemology
ethics
logic
metaphysics
aestetics
phenomenology
anti-realism
nominalism
philosophical analysis
realism
axiology
theleology
philosophical logic
philosophy of language
semantics
ontology
monism
dualism
pluralism
realism
anti-realism
objectivism
monism
solipsism
dualism
non-dualism
logical atomism
logical holism
psychologism
anti-psychologism
in-re-realism
in-re-structuralism
factualism
