# About WSL 2 resource usage

https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Category:Commands


* Build An Accelerated KVM Guest Custom Kernel for WSL 2 - 2022 Edition
https://boxofcables.dev/kvm-optimized-custom-kernel-wsl2-2022/
This guide walks you through the process of building a basic accelerated KVM custom kernel for WSL 2 that can be used with any WSL 2 distro you have installed.

* Reduce WSL2 Disk Usage
https://loadforge.com/blog/41/reduce-wsl2-disk-usage
WSL2 on Windows is amazing for developers, but it constantly grows in size and ultimately winds up using a lot more disk space than necessary. Especially if you are a Docker user. This guide covers reducing your actual Linux install size (typically Ubuntu) as well as freeing up space the WSL2 virtual hard disks use.

* Building CBL-Delridge, Microsoft's other Linux distro (2022)
https://boxofcables.dev/building-cbl-d-microsofts-other-linux-distro/
Microsoft has another Linux distro you probably haven't heard of. You can easily build it and even import it into WSL.

* Getting Started with Ubuntu Core on Hyper-V using WSL
https://boxofcables.dev/getting-started-on-ubuntu-core-with-hyper-v/


https://boxofcables.dev/tag/wsl/
https://boxofcables.dev/trying-wsl2-on-hyper-v/

* WSLg
https://github.com/microsoft/wslg

* Taming the WSL 2 Resource Monster
https://jimmybogard.com/taming-the-wsl-2-resource-monster/

* Reduce Windows Subsystem For Linux 2 memory usages
https://blog.nillsf.com/index.php/2021/05/09/reduce-windows-subsystem-for-linux-2-memory-usage/

https://docs.yoctoproject.org/dev-manual/start.html

* Moving WSL2's VHDX file to a different location
http://nuts4.net/post/moving-wsl2-vhdx-file-to-a-different-location

* Trying the New WSL 2. It's Fast! (Windows Subsystem for Linux)
https://www.digitalocean.com/community/posts/trying-the-new-wsl-2-its-fast-windows-subsystem-for-linux

* How to Boost Docker with WSL2
https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-improve-docker-performance-with-wsl2-3a54402ab0f2

* Windows 11 WSL2 Performance Is Quite Competitive Against Ubuntu 21.10
https://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=article&item=windows11-wsl2-good&num=1

* How do I get back unused disk space from ubuntu on wsl2?
https://superuser.com/questions/1606213/how-do-i-get-back-unused-disk-space-from-ubuntu-on-wsl2

* docker and wsl: Docker Desktop WSL 2 backend
https://docs.docker.com/desktop/windows/wsl/

* Windows Terminal Customization for WSL 2 â€“ The Complete Guide
https://www.ceos3c.com/wsl-2/windows-terminal-customization-wsl2/

* how-to-speed-up-linux-on-wsl2-common-mistake-of-upgrade-from-wsl1
https://georgik.rocks/how-to-speed-up-linux-on-wsl2-common-mistake-of-upgrade-from-wsl1/

* wsl-config
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config

* Reclaim Tons of Disk Space by Compacting Your Docker Desktop WSL 2 VM
https://nickjanetakis.com/blog/reclaiming-tons-of-diskspace-by-compacting-your-docker-desktop-wsl-2-vm

* How to configure your WSL resources
https://dev.to/abhijithganesh/how-to-configure-your-wsl-resources-594m

* Shrink your WSL2 Virtual Disks and Docker Images and Reclaim Disk Space
https://www.hanselman.com/blog/shrink-your-wsl2-virtual-disks-and-docker-images-and-reclaim-disk-space

* WSL2 - Better Managing System Resources
https://ryanharrison.co.uk/2021/05/13/wsl2-better-managing-system-resources.html

WSL issues
https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/4699

* Linux Dev Environment on Windows with WSL 2, Docker Desktop and More
https://nickjanetakis.com/blog/a-linux-dev-environment-on-windows-with-wsl-2-docker-desktop-and-more

* 3 Gotchas with WSL 2 around Disk Space, Memory Usage and Performance
https://nickjanetakis.com/blog/3-gotchas-with-wsl-2-around-disk-space-memory-usage-and-performance



* docker for windows
https://github.com/docker/for-win

* DataKit
https://github.com/moby/datakit
DataKit -- Orchestrate applications using a Git-like dataflow
DataKit is a tool to orchestrate applications using a Git-like dataflow. It revisits the UNIX pipeline concept, with a modern twist: streams of tree-structured data instead of raw text. DataKit allows you to define complex build pipelines over version-controlled data. DataKit is currently used as the coordination layer for `HyperKit`, the hypervisor component of `Docker for Mac and Windows`, and for the DataKitCI continuous integration system.

* HyperKit
https://github.com/moby/hyperkit

* Docker for Mac and Windows Beta (2016)
https://www.docker.com/blog/docker-for-mac-windows-beta/
