# MVC

Laravel uses the MVC architectural design pattern so the most important points of interest should be the mentioned models, controllers and views, but there is also data persistance, authentication, verification and shit.

High level elements:
- routing
  - web
  - API
- controllers
- middleware
- models
- database
  - migrations
  - factories
  - seeding
- views


## MVC Overview

Main Elements: routes, controllers, models, views.

For any project we should first come up with a db schema. Tables in the db should represent models in the app. Relationships between models are represented as relationships between tables, which usually includes foreign key constraints to cascade the updating and deleting of records.

The name of the *model* should use singular number, while the name of the corresponding *table* should be the plural form of the singular word. Laravel comes with a lot of logic to convert words between sn and pl.

The name of the *controller* may be in either form, e.g. both `PostController` and `PostsController` are fine.

The name for migration follows the convention:
- creating a table: create_<model>_table
- altering a table: add_fk_to_<model>_table

Creating a model:
- php artisan make:model

Creating a controller:
- php artisan make:controller

Creating a migration:
- php artisan make:migration
- php artisan make:migration --create<model>


make:migration       Create a new migration file
make:factory         Create a new model factory
make:seeder          Create a new seeder class

make:model           Create a new Eloquent model class
make:controller      Create a new controller class

make:middleware      Create a new middleware class
make:resource        Create a new resource
make:request         Create a new form request class
make:rule            Create a new validation rule
