# Webdev :: Glossary

<!-- TOC -->

- [Jamstack](#jamstack)
- [Static sites](#static-sites)
- [Static site generator](#static-site-generator)
- [Hakyll](#hakyll)
- [Next.js](#nextjs)
- [Web design](#web-design)
- [Web engineering](#web-engineering)
- [Web development](#web-development)

<!-- /TOC -->

## Jamstack
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamstack

Jamstack stands for JavaScript, API and Markup, which are generated by a static site generator.

In Jamstack websites, the application logic typically resides on the client side (for example embedded e-commerce checkout that interacts with pre-rendered static content), without being tightly coupled to the back end server. They are mostly served with Git-based CMS or headless CMS.

The Jamstack is not a framework but is rather defined by Jamstack.org as an architecture pattern: Jamstack is an architectural approach that decouples the web experience layer from data and business logic, improving flexibility, scalability, performance, and maintainability. 

Jamstack removes the need for business logic to dictate the web experience. It enables a composable architecture for the web where custom logic and 3rd party services are consumed through APIs.   

https://jamstack.org/

## Static sites
Static sites are fast, secure, easy to deploy, and manageable using version control.

## Static site generator
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_site_generator
Static site generators (SSGs) are engines that use *flat text* input files like *markdown*, *reStructuredText*, and *AsciiDoc* to generate a static web page. For example Jekyll is a SSG, written in Ruby, that generates sites that can be hosted for free on GitHub. Hugo is written in Go and generates sites that can be hosted for free on GitLab. Next.js uses JavaScript. Static sites generated by static site generators do no access any backed after the site is generated, making them first-class citizens on content delivery networks (CDNs). SSGs are typically for informative content, such as blogs, documentation, manuals, news.

## Hakyll
Hakyll is a Haskell library for generating static sites, mostly aimed at managing personal blogs. It is written in a very configurable way and uses an xmonad-like DSL for configuration. Integration with pandoc gives us markdown and TeX support, including syntax highlighting and other goodies.


## Next.js

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Next.js
https://github.com/vercel/next.js
https://nextjs.org/

Next.js is an open-source web development framework created by Vercel enabling React-based web applications with server-side rendering and generating static websites. React documentation mentions Next.js among "Recommended Toolchains" advising it to developers as a solution when "Building a server-rendered website with Node.js". Where traditional React apps can only render their content in the client-side browser, Next.js extends this functionality to include applications rendered on the server-side.


## Web design
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_design
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Web_design

Web design encompasses many different skills and disciplines in the production and maintenance of websites. 

The different areas of web design include 
- web graphic design
- user interface design (UI design)
- authoring code and software
- user experience design (UX design)
- search engine optimization

Often many individuals will work in teams covering different aspects of the design process, although some designers will cover them all.

The term "web design" is normally used to describe the design process relating to the front-end (client side) design of a website including writing markup.

Web design partially overlaps web engineering in the broader scope of *web development*. 

Web designers are expected to have an awareness of usability and be up to date with web accessibility guidelines.

## Web engineering
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_engineering

The World Wide Web has become a major delivery platform for a variety of complex and sophisticated enterprise applications in several domains. In addition to their inherent multifaceted functionality, these Web applications exhibit complex behaviour and place some unique demands on their usability, performance, security, and ability to grow and evolve. However, a vast majority of these applications continue to be developed in an ad hoc way, contributing to problems of usability, maintainability, quality and reliability.

While Web development can benefit from established practices from other related disciplines, it has certain distinguishing characteristics that demand special considerations. In recent years, there have been developments towards addressing these considerations.

Web engineering focuses on the methodologies, techniques, and tools that are the foundation of Web application development and which support their design, development, evolution, and evaluation. Web application development has certain characteristics that make it different from traditional software, information system, or computer application development.

Web engineering is multidisciplinary and encompasses contributions from diverse areas: systems analysis and design, software engineering, hypermedia/hypertext engineering, requirements engineering, human-computer interaction, user interface, data engineering, information science, information indexing and retrieval, testing, modelling and simulation, project management, and graphic design and presentation. Web engineering is neither a clone nor a subset of software engineering, although both involve programming and software development. While Web Engineering uses software engineering principles, it encompasses new approaches, methodologies, tools, techniques, and guidelines to meet the unique requirements of Web-based applications.

## Web development
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_development
Web development is the work involved in developing a website for the Internet (World Wide Web) or an intranet (a private network). Web development can range from developing a simple single static page of plain text to complex web applications, electronic businesses, and social network services. A more comprehensive list of tasks to which Web development commonly refers, may include Web engineering, Web design, Web content development, client liaison, client-side/server-side scripting, Web server and network security configuration, and e-commerce development.

Among Web professionals, "Web development" usually refers to the main non-design aspects of building Web sites: writing markup and coding. Web development may use content management systems (CMS) to make content changes easier and available with basic technical skills.

For larger organizations and businesses, Web development teams can consist of hundreds of people (Web developers) and follow standard methods like Agile methodologies while developing Web sites. Smaller organizations may only require a single permanent or contracting developer, or secondary assignment to related job positions such as a graphic designer or information systems technician. Web development may be a collaborative effort between departments rather than the domain of a designated department. There are three kinds of Web developer specialization: front-end developer, back-end developer, and full-stack developer. Front-end developers are responsible for behavior and visuals that run in the user browser, while back-end developers deal with the servers. Since the commercialization of the Web with Tim Berners-Lee developing the World Wide Web at CERN, the industry has boomed and has become one of the most used technologies ever.
