# SQL Modes## Selecting SQL ModesMySQL server can operate in different SQL modes, and can apply these modes differently for different clients, depending on the value of the `sql_mode` system variable. DBAs can set the global SQL mode to match site server operating requirements, and each app can set its session SQL mode to its own requirements. Modes affect the SQL syntax MySQL supports and the data validation checks it performs. This makes it easier to use MySQL in different environments and to use MySQL together with other database servers.## Running MySQL in ANSI ModeTo run MySQL Server in ANSI mode, start *mysqld* with the `--ansi` option.Running the server in ANSI mode is the same as starting it with the following options: `--transaction-isolation=SERIALIZABLE --sql-mode=ANSI`To achieve the same effect at runtime, execute these two statements:```sqlSET GLOBAL TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SERIALIZABLE;SET GLOBAL sql_mode = 'ANSI';```Setting `sql_mode` system variable to 'ANSI' enables all SQL mode options thatare relevant for ANSI mode as follows:```bashmysql> SET GLOBAL sql_mode='ANSI';mysql> SELECT @@GLOBAL.sql_mode;-> 'REAL_AS_FLOAT,PIPES_AS_CONCAT,ANSI_QUOTES,IGNORE_SPACE,ANSI'```Running the server in ANSI mode with `--ansi` is not quite the same as setting the SQL mode to 'ANSI' because the `--ansi` option also sets the *transaction isolation level*.## Important SQL ModesThe most important sql_mode values are probably these:* ANSI   This mode changes syntax and behavior to conform more closely to standard SQL. It is one of the special combination modes listed at the end of this section.* STRICT_TRANS_TABLES   If a value could not be inserted as given into a transactional table, abort the statement. For a nontransactional table, abort the statement if the value occurs in a single-row statement or the first row of a multiple-row statement. More details are given later in this section.* TRADITIONAL   Make MySQL behave like a "traditional" SQL database system. A simple description of this mode is "give an error instead of a warning" when inserting an incorrect value into a column. It is one of the special combination modes listed at the end of this section.  > With TRADITIONAL mode enabled, an INSERT or UPDATE aborts as soon as an error occurs. If you are using a nontransactional storage engine, this may not be what you want because data changes made prior to the error may not be rolled back, resulting in a “partially done” update.When referring to *strict mode* it means a mode with either or both `STRICT_TRANS_TABLES` or `STRICT_ALL_TABLES` enabled.* Other modes:ALLOW_INVALID_DATESANSI_QUOTESERROR_FOR_DIVISION_BY_ZEROHIGH_NOT_PRECEDENCEIGNORE_SPACENO_AUTO_CREATE_USERNO_AUTO_VALUE_ON_ZERONO_BACKSLASH_ESCAPESNO_ENGINE_SUBSTITUTIONNO_FIELD_OPTIONSNO_KEY_OPTIONSNO_TABLE_OPTIONSNO_UNSIGNED_SUBTRACTIONNO_ZERO_DATE NO_ZERO_IN_DATEONLY_FULL_GROUP_BYPAD_CHAR_TO_FULL_LENGTH...