# ComponentsComponents are single, independent units of an interface with their own state,markup and style. Vue components can be defined in 4 main ways:1. `new Vue({ /* option obj */ })` The global root component2. `Vue.component('component-name', { /* options obj */ })` Global component3. The third is by using Local Components4. Single File Components defined in .vue filesA component initialized with `new Vue()` is the main container component that is injected into a HTML node specified as a string containing the CSS selector (e.g. '#app' to inject it into a `<div id=app>`), or a HTML node may be given.Other components in the app are initialized using `Vue.component()`. They allow you to define custom HTML tags, which represent corresponding components. The output of a component is specified in its `template` property.```html<!-- In HTML --><div id="app">    <user-name name="Flavio"></user-name></div>// in JS script block// component defining custom tagVue.component('user-name', {	props: ['name'],	template: '<p>Hi {{ name }}</p>'})// main container componentnew Vue({  el: '#app'})```The 'user-name' component has a property called `prop`, which is an array defining which attributes may be passed down into this component from its ancestors; i.e. which attributes this component accepts.## Component nameThe name of a component may be given in two ways:1. in kebab-case (e.g. 'custom-component')2. in PascalCase (e.g. 'CustomComponent')Internally, Vue creates aliases from kebab-case name to the PascalCase name and vice versa, so you may user either. By convention, former is often used in the template (to specify the custom tag) and the latter in JS.To retain compatibility with the Web Components official standard and API (by which the Vue components are inspired but are otherwise independent), it is best to give compound names to components, that is, name consisting of two words joined with a dash (e.g. "alert-box").## Local componentsComponents created with `Vue.component()` are **globally registered**. You don't need to assign it to a JS variable to be able to reuse it.You can make a component local by assigning an object that defines the component to a variable, then make it available inside another component via the `components` property:```jsconst Sidebar = {	template: '<aside>Sidebar</aside>'}new Vue({	el: '#app',	components: {		Sidebar	}})```Components may be contained in the same file, but it's better to separate them using ES modules:```jsimport Sidebar from './Sidebar'export default {  el: '#app',  components: {	Sidebar  }}```## Reusing componentsA child component may be added to the app multiple times. Each instance is independent from the other instances.```<div id="app">  <user-name name="Flavio"></user-name>  <user-name name="Roger"></user-name>  <user-name name="Syd"></user-name></div>```