# Single File ComponentA .vue file is a custom file format that uses HTML-like syntax to describe a Vue component. Each .vue file consists of 3 types of top-level language blocks: <template>, <script> and <style>, and optionally additional <custom1> blocks.vue-loader will parse the file, extract each language block, pipe them through other loaders if necessary, and finally assemble them back into an ES Module whose default export is a Vue component options object.vue-loader supports using non-default languages, such as CSS pre-processors and compile-to-HTML template languages, by specifying the *lang* attribute for a language block, e.g. `<style lang="sass">`.**Single File Component (SFC)** is a special .vue file that defines all 3 aspects of a component in one place:1. structure:    `<template>` HTML or a pre-processor (Pug, Haml)2. presentation: `<style>`    CSS or a pre-processor (Sass, Less, PostCSS)3. behaviour:    `<script>`   JS or alt (TS, CoffeScript)Vue components can be made in plain .js files which don't require webpack, although authoring components that way comes with decreased readability and organization - HTML template must be specified as a string, and the CSS styling cannot be included in the same file. For smaller components, especially if they don't require any styling, this may be acceptable.For a full WC galore, the .vue files are a must as they provide many benefits. All 3 aspects that define a component are contained in a single .vue file: template, stylying and logic. They require processing by *webpack* and webpack's *loaders*, but they give very significant things in return. The .vue files offer more pleasent syntax thanks to their ability to use a preprocessor of choice for any of the three parts. The hard dependency on webpack also means the ability to use the lastest JS features and native ES modules (`import` and `export` keywords).The CSS styling may be scoped locally by using the `scoped` attribute in the `<style>` tag: `<style scoped>` so the CSS styles of different components do not clash. However, this is not a true namespaced demarcation but an automated naming scheme.Preprocessors support includes:* template  - Pug  - Haml* style  - Sass  - Less  - Stylus  - PostCSS* script  - TypeScript  - CoffeScript