# Classification of PLs


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Programming_language_classification
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Functional_languages

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_Generalized_Markup_Language



* Timeline of programming languages - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_programming_languages

* List of programming languages by type - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_programming_languages_by_type#Functional_languages

* SequenceL - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SequenceL

* Mercury (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mercury_(programming_language)

* Futhark (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futhark_(programming_language)

* Curry (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curry_(programming_language)

* C-- - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C--

* Clipper (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clipper_(programming_language)

* Harbour (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harbour_(programming_language)

* Function-level programming - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function-level_programming

* Scientific workflow system - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_workflow_system

* SASL (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SASL_(programming_language)

* Kent Recursive Calculator - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kent_Recursive_Calculator

* SETL - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SETL

* Assembly language - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assembly_language

* Curl (programming language) - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curl_(programming_language)

* List of C-family programming languages - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_C-family_programming_languages


* Computer Languages Timeline
https://www.levenez.com/lang/
* UNIX History
https://www.levenez.com/unix/
* Windows History
https://www.levenez.com/windows/

* Collected Information On About 2500 Computer Languages
https://web.archive.org/web/20160506170543/http://people.ku.edu/~nkinners/LangList/Extras/langlist.htm

* Interactive Roster of Programming Languages
https://web.archive.org/web/20080511193953/http://hopl.murdoch.edu.au/
https://web.archive.org/web/20080516130743/http://hopl.murdoch.edu.au/tours.prx
https://web.archive.org/web/20080517014404/http://hopl.murdoch.edu.au/taxandgenie.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080516130741/http://hopl.murdoch.edu.au/taxonomy.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20080517015137/http://hopl.murdoch.edu.au/polykey.html

* Strangest language features
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1995113/strangest-language-feature
https://dev.to/awwsmm/20-intriguing-unusual-and-goofy-programming-languages-238f
https://www.quora.com/What-are-some-of-the-most-strange-programming-language-features

* Rockstar
Rockstar is a computer programming language designed for creating programs that are also hair metal power ballads.
https://codewithrockstar.com/

* 99 bottles of beer in various langs
http://99-bottles-of-beer.net/

* Evil C
https://alf.nu/EvilC
