# JS :: Ref :: Data types :: Machine primitives

*Machine primitive types* are the low-level data types. They are a set of data types fundamental for the functioning of a computer. The members of the set depend on the CPU architecture, but almost all architectures support integers and floating-point numbers, both constrained by a particular *word size*. Word is bit-length, it specifies the number of bit that form the fundamental unit of size, storage, capacity, etc. More precisely, bits are moved around in word-sized chunks. The size of the word in modern CPUs is 64bits. This value infuences all aspects of computer operations: it is the amount of bits that can be read/written to memory at the time, it is the width of the buses that transfer bits around, it is the size of CPU registers, it is the size of the most efficent integers and floating-point numbers. The types of such integers are usually denoted by `i64` and `u64`, depending on whether the underlying bits should be interperted as representing a signed or an unsigned integer. The type of floating-point numbers is known as `Double` or `f64`. All other machine primitive types are derived from the numbers, that is from the integers, like characters, denoted by `Char`, which are just integers with a particular interpretation. Boolean values, if offered as machine primitives, are counter- intuitively, not representable by a single bit, even though that that would be sufficient - because word is 64 bits, it means that both Boolean value, true and false, take 64 bits (even though they only use 1 of those 64 bits). Word also determines the size of *machine pointers* and thus also restricts the amount of addressable memory.
